# Directed Simplicial Theory

## Overview

To be able to provide a mathematical theory of Reality, one must first 
address the question: *How "Real" is Mathematics?*

Any discussion of the "Reality" or "Validity" of Mathematics is 
essentially a discussion of the *Foundations of Mathematics*.

The classical foundations of Mathematics, as developed over the past 
200 years, typically consists of some order of *logic* (first or 
second-order) together with the axioms of [Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory 
with the axiom of 
choice](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zermelo-Fraenkel_set_theory) 
(ZFC).

Alternate foundations *can* be provided by using one or other Type 
Theory. The recent [Homotopy Type 
Theory](http://homotopytypetheory.org/) (HoTT), provided the final 
ideas required to "crystallise" our particular work in the foundations 
of mathematics.

Current foundations of Mathematics attempt to formalise the "Logic" of 
"Propositional/Predicate Calculus".  Since at least 2007, and at 
various levels of consciousness, I have felt that this was inadequate 
for the development of a *mathematics of Reality*.  However until now, 
I could not clearly express how to found mathematics with out 
propositional/predicate calculus.

Far more fundamental and far more important then propositions is the 
concept of Causality.  I will argue, in later work, that the human 
brain, is a causality inference engine. I will equally argue that the 
unification of Relativity and Quantum Mechanics requires a careful 
understanding of the *finite* structure of causality.

As should become evident, developing the mathematics of the *finite* 
structure of causality, is most easily done when based upon Directed 
Simplicial Theory rather than classical propositional/predicate 
calculus. Following the lead of HoTT, propositional/predicate calculus, 
as well as set theory will be specific "universes" of Directed 
Simplicial Type Theory.

The important point here, is that, while the mathematics of causality 
is *implicitly* "part" of classical logic, it is conceptually useful to 
make the structure of causality *explicit* in our foundations of 
mathematics.  Inferring and manipulating causality is after all the 
main aim of all of the sciences and engineering.

This book is devoted to giving the reader a more "mathematical" 
overview of Directed Simplicial Theory.  It is meant to be read in 
companion with the very much more detailed *Directed Simplicial Theory 
Implemented in Haskell*.
